Abstract Guidelines:

https://mhsrs.health.mil/MHSRS/about/abstractguidelines

Abstract Title: Limit of 130 characters (includes spacing)

Abstract Length: Limit of 2,500 characters (includes spacing)

Abstract Disclaimer: Limit of 700 characters (includes spacing)

Learing Objectives: Three (3) are required.  These should answer the question - What do you expect the attendee to be able to do at the end of the session?  Each learning objective should start with an action verb (e.g., Describe, Analyze, Discuss, etc).  Each learning objective has a limit of 250 characters (includes spacing).

Research abstracts should include data and conclusions formatted as: Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results, Conclusions.

Abstract Deadline: 31 March 2026

Breakout Session:  Military Injury Biomechanics & Applications to Warfighter Injury Prevention

Disclaimer: The views and opinions of expressed in this abstract are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of their employers or sponsors.

Title: Towards a Fully Automated Workflow for Subject-Specific Human Digital Twins with Clinical Brain Strain Validation

Anu Tripathi (1)
Michael Buche (3)
Rika Wright Carlsen (1)
Emma Lejeune (2)
Chad Hovey (3)

(1) Department of Engineering, Robert Morris University, Pittsburgh, PA
(2) Department of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA
(3) Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM

INTRODUCTION

The problem: High inter-suject variability in mTBI requires personalized risk prediction, yet models must be validated against clinical ground trust to be reliable for military appliation.

The gap: Previous iterations focused on autometed pipeline development (autotwin) and mesh sensitivity (voxel versus conformal).  However, large-scale validation against *in vivo* brain deformation is required for confidence in the pipelines predictions.

Objective: To validate the autotwin workflow by comparing simulated brain strains against clinical tagged MRI data across a 50-subject cohort.


MATERIALS AND METHODS

Data source:  We utilized the Bayly dataset (n=50) featuring tagged MRI of the human brain during dynamic head motion.

Loading Conditions: Analysis of two distinct kinematics: neck extension and neck rotation.

The Workflow: Automated mesh generation for finite element models, creating a Human Digital Twin (HDT), from clinically available T1-weigted MR image data sets using the automesh pipeline.

Validation Metric: Comparison of localized displacement and strain fields (e.g., in the corpus callosum and brainstem) between FE simulations and tagged MRI experimental measurements.

Comparison of shear wave timing and propagation of the model versus experiement.

RESULTS

Performance: Report on success rate and generation time for automated pipeline to produce unique meshes for each of the subjects in the dataset.

Accuracy: Correlation coefficient and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) between the simulated and experimental brain displacement and strain for both extension and rotation.

Variability: Report on the inter-subject variability observed in both the simulation and experiment.



CONCLUSIONS

Clinical utility: The autotwin workflow demonstrates the ability to accurately predict *in vivo* brain deformation across a diverse population.

Military Impact: Validated HDTs provide confidence in the workflow's predictive capability.  Validated models may be used to assess blast and impact threats, with an eye toward the design of next-generation personal protective equipement.

Future work: Scaling of the validated workflow to include subjects with higher strains.   Utilitization of the framework in real-time injury prediction.

Learning Objectives

- Analyze the accuracy of the autotwin workflow by comparing simulation of brain strain to clinically validated tagged MRI data.
- Discuss how cliniclly validated, subject-specific digital twins may help the design and testing of military personal protective equipment
- Highlight the limitations and opportunities for digital twin models to predict brain strain in higher strain regiemes, where clinical human testing data is unavailable

