Abstract Guidelines:

https://mhsrs.health.mil/MHSRS/about/abstractguidelines

Abstract Title: Limit of 130 characters (includes spacing)

Abstract Length: Limit of 2,500 characters (includes spacing)

Abstract Disclaimer: Limit of 700 characters (includes spacing)

Learing Objectives: Three (3) are required.  These should answer the question - What do you expect the attendee to be able to do at the end of the session?  Each learning objective should start with an action verb (e.g., Describe, Analyze, Discuss, etc).  Each learning objective has a limit of 250 characters (includes spacing).

Research abstracts should include data and conclusions formatted as: Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results, Conclusions.

Abstract Deadline: 31 March 2026

Breakout Session:  Military Injury Biomechanics & Applications to Warfighter Injury Prevention

Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed in this abstract are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of their employers or sponsors.

Title: Towards a Fully Automated Workflow for Subject-Specific Human Digital Twins with Clinical Brain Strain Validation

Anu Tripathi (1)
Evangelos Apostolakis (2)
Michael Buche (3)
Anastasia Tzoumaka (1)
Rika Wright Carlsen (1)
Emma Lejeune (2)
Chad Hovey (3)

(1) Department of Engineering, Robert Morris University, Pittsburgh, PA
(2) Department of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA
(3) Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM

INTRODUCTION

High inter-subject variability in mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) requires personalized risk prediction.  Computational approaches that aim to model mTBI can no longer be "one-size-fits-most."  Such models, class-based (male versus female), population-based (American Female 5%, American Male 50%, American Male 95%), or a singleton (a single, bespoke "human head model"), lack individual specificity and therefore are limited in their effectiveness to provide relevant and tailored injury risk prediction.

Our past work demonstrated an automated workflow, called "autotwin", capable of creating personalized computational models from an individual's MR/CT imaging data, at scale and without human intervention.  The application of our workflow on the IXI dataset (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/ixi_dataset), a collection of over 600 MR images from normal, healthy subjects, demonstrated significant (>20%) subject-to-subject variability in mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) metrics (MPS95 and MPS95).  While this previous effort proved robustness of the workflow through its use on 100s of subjects, the predicted brain deformation for each model lacked a connection to experimental validation since the IXI dataset was purely anatomical (not physiological) in nature.

In the present work, we apply our automated workflow to a new data set that not only has numerous human subjects (each with a unique MR scan) but also contains brain displacement and strain measurements from *in vivo* experiment.  Our objective was to utilize the tagged MRI data from the Brain Biomechanics Imaging Resources dataset (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/bbir) to validate our simulated displacement and strain results with experimental measurements.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

We used our autotwin workflow (https://github.com/autotwin), an open-source framework capable of using a subject-specific imaging dataset to produce a unique computational model, which in turn, provides a personalized injury risk assessment.  We then harvested data from the tagged MRI BBIR dataset (n=50).  This dataset provided a large population of unique human subjects, each with their unique structural imaging.  Importantly, this dataset also provided *in vivo* brain displacement and strain measurements for subconcussive head impact scenarios, head extension or head rotation.

The autotwin workflow generated a unique Human Digital Twin for each subject.  Finite element models were created from clinical T1-weighted MRI.  Skull, cerebrospinal fluid, brain (white and gray matter), and membranes (falx and tentorium) were modeled.  We applied the unique head cradle motion recorded in the experiment as a boundary condition to the rigid skull of the model.  We compared brain displacement and strain fields between FE simulations and tagged MRI experimental measurements.  We also compared shear wave timing and propagation of the model versus experiment.

RESULTS

The fully automated autotwin pipeline successfully generated unique, high-fidelity hexahedral meshes for 100% of the 50-subject cohort without requiring manual geometric cleanup or parameter tuning.  The average generation time per subject was on the order of minutes.  This automation demonstrates a significant reduction in the manual intervention typically required for subject-specific brain modeling.

Quantitatively, the simulated brain displacement and strain fields showed strong correlation with the experimental tagged MRI data for both neck extension and rotation, with a mean correlation error metric of less than 10 percent. These results highlight the workflow's ability to effectively capture inter-subject anatomical variability. The shear wave magnitude and timing compared favorably, demonstrating the model's ability to predict shear deformation and propagation.

CONCLUSIONS

We demonstrate the ability of the autotwin workflow to accurately predict *in vivo* brain deformation across a diverse and large population.  The validated HDTs provide confidence in the workflow's predictive capability.  This validated workflow can be used to assess blast and impact threats encountered by military personnel.  The automation aspect makes the integration of personalized injury risk assessment into the design process for next-generation personal protective equipment viable.

The BBIR dataset is limited to subconcussive, non-injurious head impacts since it was derived from human volunteer testing.  Accordingly, the conclusions reached in this study are limited to the same subset of possible head motion environments.  Nonetheless, a milestone toward the development of human digital twin workflow that is automated and validated has been achieved.  Moreover, the framework now exists to generate digital twin models to predict brain deformation in higher strain regimes, where clinical human testing is unavailable.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

- Analyze the accuracy of the autotwin workflow by comparing simulation of brain strain to clinically validated tagged MRI data.
- Discuss how clinically validated, subject-specific digital twins may help the design and testing of military personal protective equipment
- Highlight the limitations and opportunities for digital twin models to predict brain strain in higher strain regimes, where clinical human testing data is unavailable
image
